[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations,"
and we're broadcasting from the
Sounds True Wake Up Festival
in the beautiful Rockies
surrounding Estes Park,
Colorado.
So my guest today experienced
tonic seizures for 25 years,
where in many cases her
heart would just stop,
and she had to be resuscitated.
Lisa Wimberger taught
herself to combine meditation
and neuroscience to
create the process that
would help her retrain
her nervous system.
She calls this neurosculpting.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you for being here.
>>LISA WIMBERGER: Thank
you so much for having me.
>>LISA: Wow.
So neurosculpting.
You had to teach yourself this
out of a necessity to live.
Yes?
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
Absolutely.
I had a lifelong
experience and relationship
with seizures that went
undiagnosed for most of my life
until I was 30.
So I would have these
seizures and wake
up in places-- in
the bathroom wedged
between the toilet and the tub.
I'd wake up with black eyes.
I would have bumps on my head.
But as I got--
>>LISA: No idea of
what was happening?
>>WIMBERGER: No.
No idea.
>>LISA: Did it-- any
onset cues or clues?
>>WIMBERGER: I would have
a few seconds of uh oh,
something is not right.
And at first they were
short; they were more
like fainting spells.
My first one at 15, I
recovered very quickly.
I woke up.
My friends were there.
They helped me up.
I felt fine.
>>LISA: What was it from?
Do you know what
it was caused from?
>>WIMBERGER: Well,
at 15 on my birthday
I was hit by lightning
in the base of the spine.
>>LISA: What did
that feel like that?
>>WIMBERGER: That was horrible.
That felt like a
sledgehammer just smashing
into the base of the spine.
Another friend was with me.
He also got hit.
And the rest of the group of
friends that were around us
were in shock and reacting.
I didn't really
know what happened.
I didn't believe them
when they told me
we had catapulted off the wall
that we were leaning against.
And they said, you
were hit, you were hit.
>>LISA: They saw a ray of
lightning come down, and--
>>WIMBERGER: Well, we
heard the crack of thunder,
and then there was lightning.
And the next thing I know,
I'm on the ground, and so
was the boy who was next to me.
And they all told us this
story that we were hit
and we had flown off the wall.
And I didn't really know
if that was true or not,
but my watch had stopped
precisely at that moment.
And I thought, well,
maybe this is true.
But I'm conscious.
I'm alive.
I don't know.
>>LISA: So did you feel
the impact, hurt, anything?
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
It was a huge jolt to
the base of my spine
as though someone had
taken a sledgehammer.
And I was sore.
But I was conscious.
I was functioning.
And from my
interpretation of what
it must be like to
be hit by lightning,
I couldn't possibly have been.
I'm alive.
I don't have scorch marks.
My hair was already curly.
So I thought maybe this
wasn't exactly that.
But shortly after that
I start blacking out.
That was the summer I
started having the blackouts.
That weekend I had my
first fainting spell.
>>LISA: Did you ever
say to the doctors,
I was hit by lightning?
>>WIMBERGER: I told my parents.
And when we got back
to my friend's house,
we all told their parents,
and they didn't buy the story.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>WIMBERGER: Who
knows what's going
on with a bunch of 15-year-olds
who seemingly look fine.
So I had some episodes of
blacking out that summer,
and my parents did
take me to a doctor.
Having not witnessed
a blackout, they
were just going off me
saying I was blacking out.
They took me to a doctor.
They did a blood test
for I don't know what,
and said she's fine.
She's low blood pressure.
Or maybe she's
hormonal, or maybe she
doesn't have enough
salt in her diet.
So it went undiagnosed.
But by the time I
was 17-ish, I wasn't
recuperating very
quickly from them.
So I remember one time in the
bathroom-- normal morning,
and my face in the
mirror starts melting.
And I'm thinking
this is not right.
And I hear my voice yell, no,
as though someone else were
yelling it.
And then I don't remember
being on the ground.
But I had an entire experience
in my mind going on.
I was somewhere else.
And when I awoke to excruciating
pain through my body,
pins and needles,
and I'm in a puddle
on the ground in the bathroom.
And I'm thinking did I urinate?
What is going on?
Now I can't get up.
And I can't walk.
So this was the first time
the fainting became something
now I can't recuperate
so quickly from.
So I had to crawl
back to my bedroom.
>>LISA: What was the puddle?
>>WIMBERGER: I
didn't find out what
the puddle was until I was
30 when it was diagnosed.
But I would wake up in these
puddles with every blackout.
It turns out the puddle
is from the seizure.
So when you have a
tonic seizure, which
is to curl inward, and
your muscles contract
with everything they have,
and you are curled in,
your muscles expel
all of their energy.
And you drench all of your
energy out your pores.
And sometimes you don't hold
your bowels or your urine
during this time.
But for the most
part, it was sweat.
But imagine.
>>LISA: That much?
>>WIMBERGER: That much.
So imagine every muscle
you have contracting
so hard that they've just
expelled all of their energy.
Now there's nothing to walk;
there's nothing to get up.
You have no reserves.
>>LISA: You've
just spent it all,
and you're completely
unconscious.
>>WIMBERGER: You've
spent it all.
You're unconscious.
And then when you awake,
you have to mobilize,
and there's nothing
left to mobilize with.
>>LISA: Did your
parents start to see
these and witness
these seizures.
>>WIMBERGER: These happened
a few times a year,
usually when I was by myself.
And by the grace of a
higher force, at age 30--
After having them
happen for so long I
just stopped telling
people about them.
>>LISA: Well, let's
back up for a second,
because when you're having
these types of extreme moments,
do you live in fear of them
happening over and over again?
Do you live your
life differently
as a result of those?
>>WIMBERGER: Absolutely.
I was-- Because the
onset was so random
and it could not be
tracked to any pattern
that I could discern,
I was afraid these
would happen all the time.
One episode came on while
I was driving my car,
and I couldn't turn
the wheel of the car,
and I couldn't remain conscious.
I was fortunate enough
to veer off the road.
I was in fear a lot.
And I was using meditation at
the time to cope with the fear.
So my rich meditation practice
was really a coping mechanism
for the fallout of
all of these episodes.
>>LISA: The fear afterwards,
or right as it's coming on?
>>WIMBERGER: Both.
I was meditating when I was
healthy to deal with the fact
that I lived a very reserved,
controlled, fear based life.
And then the fallout after,
during the recuperation,
to try to make sense of this, to
try to convince myself there's
nothing wrong with
me, I'm fine, to try
to move into action
and functionality
and just brush it off.
>>LISA: And so you were
kind of ignoring them?
>>WIMBERGER: I
was ignoring them.
I'm great at denial.
>>LISA: Oh, aren't we all.
But you actually had-- You
didn't tell anybody about them,
but you didn't have any
physical effects afterwards?
Did you ever go
back to the doctor?
Did you ever take
seizure medicine?
>>WIMBERGER: No.
No seizure medicine,
because the original doctor
visit when I was 16, the
blood tests showed nothing.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WIMBERGER: So I
just ignored them.
A few friends witnessed them.
A couple boyfriends would
help me up, you know,
when I would fall and blackout
and wake up with a black guy.
And I would just sort of brush
them aside and say, I'm fine.
But the gift came in a
doctor's exam when I was 30.
I was in a routine exam,
and I said to the doctor
I feel faint.
One was coming.
There are seconds, only seconds.
And here it was.
And I said, oh I feel faint.
And he said, oh, just lie down.
And so I lied back,
the episode came,
and I was in a completely
other consciousness.
And when I awoke, I awoke
to the image of a panic
stricken doctor--
not what I wanted
to see-- leaning over me.
And I remember he
wore a bow tie, which
stands out in my mind.
So he's got this look of panic.
And he has that
needle of Atropine,
which is adrenalin, right here.
The scene out of Pulp Fiction.
I look at him.
He's shaking.
His hand is shaking.
He's about to plunge
adrenaline into my heart.
And he said you didn't tell
me you had this condition.
And in my denial, I
said what condition
are you talking about?
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>WIMBERGER: And he
said, you had a seizure,
and you flat lined.
And I said, what does that mean?
He said, your heart stopped.
I couldn't get you to breathe.
You were turning blue.
>>LISA: For how long?
>>WIMBERGER: I don't know.
Long enough for the nurse
to go into the next room,
load the needle with
Atropine and come back.
My guess, maybe that takes
45 seconds, a minute.
I don't know.
I didn't ask him.
He was shaken.
I was shaken.
And then I said, well, I'm
in a puddle, did I urinate?
He said this happens when you
have these types of seizures.
And I looked at
him, and I said I've
been waking up in these
puddles since I was 15.
And he said you've been
doing this for that long.
And he described the condition
to me, which to his description
was called vasovagal
syncope, which
is a very fancy
term for fainting.
Except there's a spectrum.
The vagus nerve,
cranial nerve 10,
has a spectrum of
nervous system responses:
blushing, light
headedness, embarrassment,
dropping the heart rate,
flutter in the chest,
to the very extreme is stopping
the heart to play dead.
It's a very reptilian
fear response.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>WIMBERGER: And so he
gave me this diagnosis,
and he said, well,
it's not epilepsy.
Because my EKGs, my
EEGs all came back fine.
>>LISA: So there's
no medication?
>>WIMBERGER: No medication.
It's not epilepsy.
No restrictions.
And what he told
me was the onset
was typically, in these
cases, stress or fear.
And I thought--
>>LISA: Didn't make
sense to you, did it?
>>WIMBERGER: I've been
meditating my whole life.
I have nothing nameable.
>>LISA: Well, it could
be the stress or fear
from the seizures.
>>WIMBERGER: Right.
But there was something
gnawing at the back of my mind
saying there's
something there that's
causing me to exit in
such a profound way.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And I wanted to ask
you, where do you go?
>>WIMBERGER: Oh goodness.
Interesting places.
I've had full visceral
experiences in these times
where people tell me that
I'm not alive or functioning.
And I'll give you one example.
One is comical, which
I was with Elvis.
Not what I expected.
But one wasv very--
one was comical,
and one was very different.
I flat lined in
front of my daughter.
She was three.
We were in a food court.
It came on from nowhere.
I think I had bitten
into a chicken bone.
So my recollection of the event
was I bit into a chicken bone,
and I did this, oh
no, my tooth is loose.
I grabbed her by the hand.
I walked into the bathroom.
I'm looking at
myself in the mirror.
I'm examining my tooth.
I see my daughter
in the periphery.
I feel her hand.
There's blood.
I taste it going down my throat.
This is all visceral memory.
And none of that happened.
I open my eyes to paramedics.
And what happened was I bit into
a chicken bone, had a seizure,
flipped over backwards,
and flat lined.
But my mind--
>>LISA: Took you
to the bathroom.
>>WIMBERGER: Took me through
a logical mental process,
a visceral experience,
a somatic experience.
I was troubleshooting what
dentist I would go to.
I was making sure my
daughter had my hand.
And that's what I
remember from the episode.
>>LISA: None of that happened.
>>WIMBERGER: No.
>>LISA: And how was your
daughter after that?
>>WIMBERGER: She was
very traumatized.
I didn't know where she was.
And she was off to the side.
Someone else had been
in the food court.
And she ran over, and she
put her hand on my-- No,
she came next to me, and I
said, put your hand on my chest.
And the paramedics were
working, and she said, mommy,
did you die?
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>WIMBERGER: I
thought, well, I'm not
ready for that conversation.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>WIMBERGER: But at
three, after I got out
of the hospital that
day, we had to start
rehearsing 911 scripts.
>>LISA: And talking about it.
So this of course
caused you to dive
into neurological
functioning, neuroscience.
And you combined it with
your meditation practice.
So how did you-- And
now I want to mention,
you don't have the
seizures anymore, right?
>>WIMBERGER: No.
I haven't had a
seizure in five years.
>>LISA: Five years.
And do you think that
you've trained yourself out
of this permanently?
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
Yes.
I'm saying yes.
What ended up happening was
the doctor told me there
was a thought trigger,
a stress trigger.
So I took that
information, went on
to get certificates
in neuro leadership,
neurobiology, the study
of synapses and neurons,
and medical
neuroscience to find out
what does cranial
nerve 10 do, and why,
and how can I start
directing through
positive neuroplasticity a new
message to cranial nerve 10.
>>LISA: Is this
the same nerve that
is responsible for Bell's Palsy?
>>WIMBERGER: Bell's
Palsy can affect
I believe it's the
trigeminal nerve, which
is the nerve that
controls facial muscles.
>>LISA: Vagus nerve as well.
>>WIMBERGER: Vagus nerve
is lower in the brain stem.
So it's down in the medulla
of the brain stem, which
controls more of the heart rate
and the reticular activating
system of the brain, the
part of the brain that alerts
the cortex to wake
up and be conscious.
>>LISA: OK.
So this part-- you deciphered
through all of your training
the specific nerve.
You did a lot of
research, I'm sure.
And you came up with the term--
found the term tonic seizures?
>>WIMBERGER: Well, the doctor
told me I had tonic seizures.
And when he described
them to me he
said those were not convulsive.
They were contractive.
>>LISA: OK.
I see.
>>WIMBERGER: So I
took my information
and determined, through
neuroscience's revelations
around self-directed
neuroplasticity,
that if I could tell a new
story with the right environment
of the brain so the
brain would buy it,
and if I could repeat
that story enough,
I could entrain a
process, a neural network
so well that it would become a
usable tool, a usable response.
>>LISA: Oh my god.
So you're literally telling
yourself a new story
so that you believe it.
>>WIMBERGER: Absolutely.
>>LISA: The brain fully
has to believe it.
So how do you do that?
>>WIMBERGER: Trial and
error was a big piece of it.
But what I started doing
after the last two episodes--
The one in front of my daughter
was very traumatic for her,
but the one after that
was most traumatic for me
because I couldn't maintain
breathing after that one.
I was going.
I was making a decision,
I'm not coming back.
And my husband had to
keep re-resuscitating me.
So after that one I said
I'm going to fix this.
So what I did was I went
into meditative states
over and over again,
and I realized
I had to first quiet my
fight or flight mind.
And my fight or flight
mind wants certain things
in order to get quiet.
So had to feed it those things.
I had to feed it
a sense of safety,
a sense of predictability,
a sense of repetition
and consistency.
All of those things
had to come first
before I could tell a new
story, before I could breathe
in love, before I
could open the spirit.
I had to know my needs
were met: the roof
is not going to cave in,
I'm nourished, safety first.
>>LISA: Safety.
What was the other two?
>>WIMBERGER: Consistency.
Predictability.
>>LISA: So you lived your
life in a very consistent way.
>>WIMBERGER: Well,
in my meditations
I was starting to go there to
feed my fight or flight brain
what it needed to calm down.
If the fight or
flight mind can say,
whew, everything is
just as we expect it.
>>LISA: So you didn't become a
shut in and live in your house.
>>WIMBERGER: No.
No.
>>LISA: You, in
your meditations,
fed your mind that information.
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
That was step one, learning
how to down regulate that.
Step two was how do I access
the part of the brain that
can do self-directed
neuroplasticity.
Well, that's the
front of the brain.
And the front of the brain
really loves novelty.
So I started focusing on--
>>LISA: Stories.
>>WIMBERGER: New aspects,
different aspects of my body
that I wasn't normally aware of.
I started going into
places of novelty
and priming my brain so that
I could now tell a new story,
and my prefrontal
cortex might believe it.
And my fight or flight mind
wouldn't get in the way
and say, no, no, no.
>>LISA: So you told
your mind that-- What
do you mean new
parts of your body?
Wait.
Let's go back to the
neuroplasticity of the brain.
The brain loves something new.
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
So the brain likes to learn
through novel stimulation.
Here I am in a
meditation, I'm relaxed,
and now I want to novelly
stimulate my brain.
I want it to focus on things
I don't normally focus on
so my brain says,
ooh, what's that?
So I will imagine a tiny
centimeter of skin right
on the inside of my right knee.
Ooh, what does that feel like?
Never felt that before.
What if I drew my awareness
to the underside of my tongue?
What would that feel like?
Oh, what if I drew my awareness
to the back of my ear?
I'm going to just
random areas of my body,
wondering with curiosity
what is that like there.
So I am giving a lot
of attention fodder
to the front of my brain so it
can just start getting engaged
and waking up.
Sometimes I brought in
images of random things,
like the cutest
little puppy would
walk in the room in my
mind's eye, and I would say,
oh that's so cute.
And I'm stimulating this novel
sense of directed awareness.
I'm entraining an ability.
So I'm priming the brain.
But now I have the task
of creating a new story.
The old story was, when I
have a wave coming at me,
I seize, I freeze, and I die.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WIMBERGER: So
that's the old story.
I need a new story.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WIMBERGER: I don't know
what's making me seize or freez,
or die, so I can't go there.
But I can go to
option B. I fight.
I scream.
I kick.
I punch.
What if I did that?
So in my mind I'd
prime my brain.
I'd relax it.
I'd stimulate this novel
sense of attention,
and I'd rehearse a script that
the next time a wave came,
I would be a banshee.
I would fight it, kick it.
And I rehearsed,
as though I were
in a play, a full blown tantrum.
>>LISA: So that people
would hear you, assist you?
>>WIMBERGER: So that I
wouldn't go to the quiet freeze
response.
>>LISA: Unconsious.
OK.
I see.
>>WIMBERGER: Fight it off.
I didn't care if it was ugly.
I didn't care if it
was the right response.
I wanted a different response.
So I took it, I made it a play.
I was the actress in the play.
I rehearsed it over
and over again.
I rehearsed it in recuperation.
I rehearsed it when I felt fine.
I would go into meditations
and rehearse my script.
How would I act the next time?
And it was about a year later
that I had an episode come on.
And seconds.
Seconds came.
I was with my husband.
We were in the car.
I grabbed the side of--
I grabbed the door,
and everything was
about to disappear.
And the script kicked in.
And I screamed like a banshee.
It was ugly.
It was not graceful.
I started punching
the dashboard,
punching the door of the car.
I got out of the car.
He pulled over.
I started ripping
things out of the car,
screaming, not knowing why,
just knowing I'm not fainting,
I'm not seizing.
>>LISA: Stay conscious.
Stay conscious.
>>WIMBERGER: I was conscious.
And then the magic unraveled.
And the magic was suddenly a
narrative came out of my mouth
that I was not planning that
narrated a very old childhood
trauma I have no
recollection of.
So I want to say I don't
know if it were true or not,
but it was there.
>>LISA: Did you check?
>>WIMBERGER: I did not.
All I know is that
it was underneath,
whether it was my imagination,
my perception, a real event.
All irrelevant to me.
What was relevant was I
entrained to a new response.
I enacted the new response.
And bubbling up
underneath it all
was a narrative that
had been so hidden
that it was causing
me all of this.
And when that
narrative came out,
I went into full tremor
shaking, which I now
know is a parasympathetic
release of trauma.
And I shook for hours.
And I felt victorious.
I felt-- I didn't
have a seizure.
And I was embarrassed for
being so ungraceful about it,
but I felt victorious.
And then after that,
two more episodes
snuck up during the
years, and I said, oh, I
don't have to go there.
And they just dissipated.
>>LISA: Do you mind if I asked
what the childhood trauma?
>>WIMBERGER: The
childhood story was
of someone molesting
me in the crib.
Now, I don't know
if that happened.
I know enough about
neuroscience to know memory
is completely fallible
and completely
an active construction.
So I know enough to say that may
or may not have ever happened.
But the story was there, and the
consequence of the story being
there was real.
>>LISA: Wow.
That is an amazing,
amazing story.
So once you came to terms
with that story bubble
up and out of you,
the traumatic shaking
was the releasing of
the energy of the story.
>>WIMBERGER: Absolutely.
>>LISA: You then faced
these traumas, the seizures,
with a different mindset.
>>WIMBERGER: Completely
different mindset.
And then they never manifested.
So the two other times
I felt that wave,
the wave just dissipated
before it even hit me.
I felt, oh, it's gone.
It passed.
It passed like a wave
that I could ride.
>>LISA: You didn't even have to
go do the thought pattern, or--
>>WIMBERGER: I didn't
even have to go to fight.
Nothing.
It just took once to
physically embody the script
I had been practicing, and
bam, the whole pattern shifted.
>>LISA: Do you still
practice the script?
Or is it just
neurologically there?
>>WIMBERGER: I
believe it's there.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It seems like it.
>>WIMBERGER: I practice
a lot of other scripts
to help me evolve through
other areas and edges of growth
in my life.
But that script is entrained.
It's embodied.
>>LISA: Now you teach
this to other people.
And you wrote a book about it
called "Neurosculpting," which
is-- What is the process
that you teach-- Out
of that incredible story, what
are the processes that you
extrapolated from the story
to actually teach people?
>>WIMBERGER: So what I did
was I distilled the method
of the meditation that enabled
me to entrain the new story.
So I had steps.
Step one, take three
to five minutes
to calm the fight
or flight center
by feeding it what
it needs to be calm.
And we go through
at the Institute
a series of those things:
predictability, stability,
consistency, autonomic
processes, safety.
So in a meditation,
the first three
to five minutes I am just
having people become aware
of gravity, not
wavering, breath,
repetitious and automatic,
the fact that they're
nourished enough to be
there, they're safe.
We bring in all sorts
of ways for them
to focus on their needs are met.
Step one.
Step two.
We move into let's tease
the prefrontal cortex
into a novel activation.
So I have them visit
places in their body
they would never have
thought of, obscure places.
I have them notice
how their clothes feel
against their skin.
I have them remember
a funny joke,
all things that we know
through neuroscience
will stimulate this.
>>LISA: The newness,
novelty thing.
>>WIMBERGER: Right.
So now what we've done is
we've shifted the brain dynamic
into its most self-directed
neuroplastic state.
>>LISA: Out of survival into
where it can actually work.
>>WIMBERGER: Absolutely.
So that was step two.
Step three.
I don't want people getting
stuck in their patterns.
This is about re-patterning.
Now, many of us can be left
brained, typically associated
with logical thought and
details and linear thinking.
Or some of us can be right
brained, typically associated
with abstract, no time,
no space experience.
I don't want you to stay in
either of those defaults.
We're about creating
a new pattern.
So what we do at
the Institute is
we use our language
to guide the meditator
through an alternating
sequence between left
and right hemisphere.
So I will use my language.
I will spell words.
I will count.
I will sequence so that I slam
that person into left brain.
If I'm spelling, think
of joy, J-O-Y. Suddenly
the meditator spells
out joy in their mind.
This is left brain
saying I can participate.
And then right away I move them
into a right brain experience.
What color, what texture,
what vibration is joy?
What would joy sound like?
So we go back and forth
with our languaging.
So the person is
forced, effortlessly,
to toggle in this alternating
manner so we don't get stuck.
>>LISA: Ah.
So it gets the brain active.
>>WIMBERGER: Active.
>>LISA: Engaged,
responsive, alert.
>>WIMBERGER: In a way that
wouldn't be their normal way.
So we're breaking
their pattern simply
by toggling them back and forth.
>>LISA: Their normal
way would just
be their typical left brain
pattern or right brain.
>>WIMBERGER: Correct.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WIMBERGER: So
that was step three,
have them get into a
bi-hemispheric alternating
activation.
Step four.
Whatever that thing is
they're thinking about,
whatever that thing they've just
attributed a color or a texture
to, where does that
live in the body,
because the body is the
voice of the thought.
So we have them go
through a body scan.
And when they find an
area where they imagine,
sense, feel, perceive
that that-- they're
holding that thing, we
have them imagine however
they want to release
it, negotiate it.
And then we bring in
a somatic awareness.
We have them tap,
or put their hand
there so that we are
embodying emotion
and a touch and a
sensory motor perception
to a new perception, which
is I'm releasing this thing.
>>LISA: Or I'm safe,
back to safety.
>>WIMBERGER: Or I'm safe.
Because when you add in a
somatic motor experience,
you enhance the plasticity
of the perception
you are thinking of.
>>LISA: The new memory, the
new thought, the new reaction.
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
>>LISA: Wow.
You've broken that
down so precisely.
I could see why, because out
of necessity in your life,
you needed to break these
moments down over 25 years
to figure out how to live.
>>WIMBERGER: Yeah.
So it's a very
methodical process.
And I have to tell you, people
coming into the Institute
don't want theory.
They don't want theory anymore.
They want a practice that
works, that gives them results.
And until I found
a way to articulate
a methodical process,
I had nothing
but hope to give someone.
And hope is beautiful.
>>LISA: For a short
amount of time.
>>WIMBERGER: But you have to
know what to do with hope.
>>LISA: Right.
Now, the Institute, what is it?
>>WIMBERGER: Well, it is a brick
and mortar, beautiful space
that is a home for non-dogmatic
healing through this process.
People come from
all walks of life
to study, to take introductory
classes, to do deep dives.
We have those who are in
high trauma come and study.
Those who want
personal transformation
come and learn these techniques.
We also have a
nutritional therapist
who teaches about feeding
the body and the brain
to support this process.
>>LISA: And this is the
Neurosculpting Institute?
>>WIMBERGER: Neurosculpting
Institute in Denver.
But we have a very robust
online and live stream option.
So we have students
around the world
who can take classes
via live stream.
They just have to
look at the calendar
and pick which
ones are available.
We have download audio.
We have classes now
that we're loading
which are downloadable
in MP3 format.
>>LISA: So are people
releasing traumatic memories?
And you can do this online.
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
>>LISA: Wow.
And it works.
>>WIMBERGER: And it works.
>>LISA: And it's
safe for people?
>>WIMBERGER: I do
want to qualify that.
In the introductory classes,
some people will unwind.
And we create a safe
environment for that.
But what we do is not
therapy, so we always
let people know that
we're teaching you
a meditative process
that you can apply,
but that if you
have deep trauma,
you may need to
see a professional
or use this to support
a therapeutic modality
you're using.
So I do like to be
clear with people
that, yes, you can unwind a lot,
and you have to be ready for it
and have your support
networks in place.
>>LISA: Yes.
That makes sense.
Now, you have helped
first responders,
policemen re-frame
situations for the people
that they're helping
or for themselves?
>>WIMBERGER: For themselves.
>>LISA: For themselves.
OK.
When they go to
a site where they
might be traumatized by
what they see but they have
to be in action, what
have you taught them?
>>WIMBERGER: So
since 2006, I've been
on a mission to teach
law enforcement.
>>LISA: Why specifically
law enforcement?
>>WIMBERGER: I don't know.
It came as a heart message.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WIMBERGER: And I
didn't question it.
I mean, I do have
family members who
I saw traumatized by being NYPD.
I saw the fallout
with their children.
But I had a very
strong heart message
that I needed to
go help officers.
And I started that
program in 2006.
I've personally,
to date, trained
1,200 officers across
the country-- CIA,
FBI, Secret Service,
some Homeland Security,
and local Colorado, and
then outside of Colorado.
I train them for
preventative wellness.
So officers have the highest
suicide rate of any profession.
Statistics are arguable, but
in general, from two years ago
the statistics from the National
Police Suicide Foundation
were that 57 officers
died in the line of duty
in this country.
Now, you would expect
that's their greatest
risk, dying by gunshot, right?
57 died in the line of duty.
454 committed suicide.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>WIMBERGER: It's
astronomically disproportionate.
>>LISA: Yes.
And that's not-- that is
definitely not reported.
>>WIMBERGER: No.
And now, with the way we see
police officers misbehaving
in the media, is
directly why I do this.
My whole mission is if you have
a pain body, or a trauma story,
or if you have seen a
collection of 10 years of crimes
against children,
or you go to a call
and there's an infant already
dead because of someone
who was drunk or abusive, and
you've collected those stories,
and you've held them
in a container, what
is your outlook
to another human?
Might you not
disregard humanity?
So my idea is these people
are carrying loaded guns.
I don't want them
behind a loaded gun
if they can't come
back to center.
>>LISA: And they're
driving around in society.
Yeah.
>>WIMBERGER: So
my mission was how
do I get them back to center?
And what I discovered in the
process was that these are,
by and large-- There's always
exceptions to the rule.
There will always be an aberrant
officer who is trigger happy,
but by and large, this
is a body of people
who have chosen to
support and serve,
and don't know how to deal
with what they're asked to do.
They don't know how to cope,
and they've collected trauma,
and they are traumatized.
And their way out is
to kill themselves.
>>LISA: Do they receive
therapy and training
when they're training
to be police officers?
I'm sure.
But not to this level
that you're talking about.
So what do you teach them to do?
>>WIMBERGER: I go
into the agencies,
and I teach classes
on neurosculpting.
So I teach them how to
recognize their trauma state,
how to recognize a
stress cycle, how
to notice what it's doing to
their perception of the world.
I help them notice how
that perception is now
the result of a story.
And then I teach them
the methodical process,
how to rewrite those
stories so that they
can start releasing their
negativity bias which
is very quickly
accumulating in their being.
>>LISA: That is beautiful.
We have a clip here of you
working with police officers.
Take a look at this.
This is Lisa Wimberger looking--
working with police officers.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Effortlessly, right now, today
is incorporate healthy fats,
healthy proteins, cut down the
sugars, exercise, and shake,
and you will change
your ability to deal
with stress indefinitely.
If you did that every
day and nothing more,
you would be far healthier than
if you didn't do those things.
So now we know that to be
in our fight or flight state
all the time is detrimental.
And it does so at the expense
of our ability to be here.
And when we're home from work,
we would like to be here.
It would serve us best.
It would help regulate
those hormones,
help us enjoy life
a little bit more,
help us maybe be a little more
relatable to those we love,
and to find a lot more enjoyment
and presence in our day
to day that doesn't
require us going back
to an adrenalized state
to feel alive again.
So how do we do this
with mental entrainment?
Because food can do it.
Exercise can help.
Shaking can help.
And then mental entrainment
is the icing on cake.
Some of you may have experience
with mental entrainment
where you are
envisioning or rehearsing
a mental script of how a certain
procedure is going to go,
and you do that over
and over and over again
so that, eventually
over time, you
can react as though that
script had been practiced.
So you're working off a
script that you rehearsed
until it becomes an
effortless, retrievable action
or memory in your body.
This is how we get better
at use of firearms.
at playing instruments,
at playing sports.
Any activity that we
want to get better at
requires us to create
and rehearse scripts.
Some of those are scripts in
the body, physical motions,
and some of those
are mental scripts.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: You have a free
resource for police officers
and first responders that they
can take a free online class
at the website.
What is the website again?
>>WIMBERGER:
Neurosculptinginstitute.com.
And I've also put
this video on YouTube.
It's a free stress
management class
for emotional
survival for officers.
It's an hour long.
And our mission at
the Institute is
to get resources to officers
outside of the agency
so that they can come and
feel safe in their processing.
>>LISA: Now, what
about all others,
about civilians that
have stress and that
need to learn resilience?
And we need to teach
ourselves new stories
and retrain our neuroplasticity.
How do you teach us to do that?
>>WIMBERGER: I invite you to
the Institute to take classes.
I invite you to look at all
the resources we have online.
We also have a
robust free library
of neuroscience
articles for people
who want to educate themselves.
And we do that there.
And we also have a team of
certified neurosculpting
facilitators who take this
work out to other venues
and are spreading it
around the country.
>>LISA: Can you teach
me a few tips when
I get into a place of
extreme stress or I--
so I can circumvent that stress.
>>WIMBERGER: Yeah.
I would say that
if you're in it,
you're in the
middle of a stress,
the first thing is to
name what you feel.
So rather than say I am angry--
When you say I am angry,
you are accessing a very
particular part of the brain.
When you change the verb
to feel, I feel angry,
you have activity that
migrates to a different part
of the brain, which then starts
to down regulate your stress
response.
So there's a power in
changing that verb.
There is a neurological change
when you change the verb.
So I would immediately go to I
am angry to I'm feeling angry.
That's the first thing.
I would start doing some deep
breathing, in through the nose
and out as much as
possible, because you're
going to start
mitigating that response.
Third, I would shake
wildly, because you
don't want to freeze
around the idea
and repeat it so that
it's in this echo chamber.
Your muscles will
start to contract
in this stress response.
You don't want to
maintain that contraction
unless you need to use it.
But if this is a
thought, you want
to shake it in a
very wild manner
and start dissipating the levels
of adrenaline and cortisol
that are now amped
in your system.
>>LISA: Uh huh.
That whole chemical cascade.
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
Those are some immediate
things you can do.
>>LISA: What about
chronic stress,
where you keep seeing
that bank balance lower.
You've gotten let go
of your job and you're
looking for another job.
I mean, those chronic stressors.
>>WIMBERGER: The
chronic stressors
require you changing the
story and the relationship
around that.
So for those chronic--
we would suggest classes,
taking those introductory
classes where
we're teaching you that whole
methodical process, where we're
holding your hand while we walk
you through it so you can start
doing that at the
end of every day.
You can start doing that
after you open the bills
and put them down for
a moment, and create,
or go into this new
meditative story
so that your reaction
is different.
And then go back to the bills.
>>LISA: And the new story could
be this is going to work out,
this is going to be
fine, this is temporary.
Those types of things?
>>WIMBERGER: Yeah.
I would say the new story
needs to be plausible to you.
>>LISA: Believable.
>>WIMBERGER: Believable to you.
So we don't want to go to the
rose colored glasses extreme.
We want it to be believable.
So this is temporary
is a great one.
Or this moment will pass
just as it always has.
Something believable.
But if you fit that
belief into the structure
of neurosculpting, then
your brain grabs on to it
and starts to believe it.
>>LISA: Interesting.
And it can help lower
the stress response
and the chronic stress.
>>WIMBERGER: And
change the pattern.
>>LISA: Now there's
a wonderful girl
that you worked
with who-- Heather.
Tell us a little
bit about Heather.
>>WIMBERGER: Heather is amazing.
She had an accident
about 11 years ago now.
She was thrown from a horse.
So her last recollection
is grabbing on
for the last moment
of control, hoping
to control the head of the
horse and not being able to.
And then she ended
up crushing her neck,
and didn't sever
her spine but had
a subluxation in the
back of her neck,
ended up a quadriplegic in a
wheelchair, fully assisted.
So she has a team of
people around the clock who
have to live with her,
help her out of bed,
put her in the wheelchair.
She is a very dynamic
woman and refused
to take that as her prognosis.
So she ended up doing a lot
of her own self therapy,
getting an adaptive yoga
teacher, getting put in a pool,
swimming, going to the gym.
They move her limbs.
And in that time, she
gained movement in her arms.
So when I met her last
year, paralyzed in her hands
and unable to
walk, and she asked
if I would work with her to help
raise money for her therapy.
And she asked me to
speak at an event.
And I said I'd
rather work with you.
So I took her on as
a pro bono client.
And we've been working
together since.
And we've been
using neurosculpting
to have her enhance
the plasticity
of her motor and sensory cortex.
>>LISA: So she creates a
new story in her brain.
>>WIMBERGER: She down
regulates her stress,
activates the front, creates a
new story in the motor cortex,
specifically in the cortex area
that controls hand movement.
>>LISA: Does she visualize?
>>WIMBERGER: She
visualizes this.
>>LISA: Moving.
I see.
OK.
Great.
>>WIMBERGER: And in
that visualization,
I have her open her
hands in her mind's eye.
I have her name each finger.
We spell each finger.
We have her give
it a personality,
abstract colors, textures.
I have her then take that thumb.
T-H-U-M-B is her thumb, and I
have her send that imagery down
through her body
into her thumbs.
We have her do somatic
repetitious identification.
I then touch her
thumbs and let her
know what it feels like
for external stimulation.
And just this summer she
has volitional movement
in her thumbs.
She's opened her index fingers.
She has the pinch motion.
And just most recently,
she's picked up a rock
and transferred it
to her other hand.
>>LISA: Oh, we get to
see a video of that.
Take a look at this video of
Lisa working with Heather.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>HEATER: Like whenever I'm
stressed out and I'm having
a hard time sleeping, I'll just
start kind of thinking about
what you tell me to do like
with my fingers and my arms
and like--
>>WIMBERGER: And you got that.
Index finger map.
Identification, location.
Acknowledge this communication
between brain and index finger.
>>HEATHER:
Identification, location.
Acknowledge this commun--
>>WIMBERGER: Communication.
>>HEATHER: Communication.
>>WIMBERGER: Wow.
>>HEATHER: I was trying
to touch my thumb, but--
>>WIMBERGER: Wow, Heather.
>>HEATHER: There we go.
>>WIMBERGER: Wow.
>>HEATHER: Look what I did.
I went like this.
It's a little
heavier in that case.
I'm just trying to
use my fingertips.
But that's nice that like it's
not-- There's a grip there.
>>WIMBERGER: You
are holding that.
That is amazing.
>>HEATHER: Like my
finger is-- I mean,
you can see the tip
of it moving like I'm
trying to squeeze them together.
>>WIMBERGER: OK.
>>HEATHER: Oh, that one's
really opening up now.
>>WIMBERGER: Woah.
When have you done that?
>>HEATHER: It's never
opened that much.
I've never even gotten
it to open because most
of the time they just
squeeze together, you know.
>>WIMBERGER: You want to move to
your index finger on the right?
>>HEATHER: Yeah.
OK, open.
Nice.
It's going on.
>>WIMBERGER: Oh my god.
>>HEATHER: Open up.
I feel like this is
a whole new chapter.
You know, like I have
embraced my legs so much.
I just didn't know how to
connect with my fingers.
>>WIMBERGER: And we'll get
back-- we'll get to your legs,
too.
We'll get to your feet,
your toes, your muscles.
We'll get to everything.
It's one piece at a time.
Yeah.
>>HEATHER: I think
it's a great idea
that we started at
my hands, because I
feel like a lot of my tension
has to do with my fingers.
Like it's so weird.
Like my legs react.
My legs are tense.
My hands are tense.
>>WIMBERGER: Mhm.
So--
>>HAETHER: I'm ready.
>>WIMBERGER: So proud of you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: That was
an amazing video.
And how long did
you work with her?
>>WIMBERGER: We work
once a week, every week,
and we're 12 or 13 sessions in.
>>LISA: That's it?
>>WIMBERGER: That's it.
>>LISA: That's it.
Wow.
My goodness.
So then you figured why
just keep this local?
Let's take it global.
>>WIMBERGER: Absolutely.
>>LISA: So tell us about
your refugee program.
>>WIMBERGER: Well,
I've partnered up
with Her Many Voices,
which is a nonprofit.
And their mission is to respond
to humanitarian needs, whatever
they may be.
And we have been wanting to
do this program for a while
together.
So we gathered a
group of refugees,
women in the community
who were making
a big difference in their lives.
They had been refugees,
but they weren't
letting that get in the way,
and they were forging ahead.
And these women were
now enrolled in college.
And so they volunteered
for this program.
And we took women from Nigeria,
Eritrea, Libya, Ethiopia,
Somalia, Crow Nation,
and Cherokee Nation.
And we brought them together.
And we started training them
in neurosculpting so that they
could start regulating
and releasing themselves
from their traumatic
stories so they could go out
and do their work
bigger in the world.
And we have a series of
trainings set up for them.
They will become facilitators
over the next eight
to nine months.
And a lot of those
women, their mission
is to go back to their
countries and offer a way
to role model for
their communities
how to become
grounded and centered,
and not become victim
to the stories.
>>LISA: So they're
learning the process,
and then they're
going to teach it.
>>WIMBERGER: They're
learning the process first
at the Institute.
You can't teach theory.
We don't do theory.
So if you have not used it
to unravel yourself and wind
yourself back up in a better
way, you cannot teach it.
So these women first are
learning the process.
And they're using it.
And we have follow
up sessions to make
sure they're using it in
a way that works for them.
And once they've demonstrated
that they've used it
on themselves, then
we will train them
on how to teach this
technique to other people.
>>LISA: All right,
well, we're going
to take a look at this video
of some of the wonderful women
that Lisa's helped.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Hi my name is Riham Bakhat.
I'm from Sudan, Africa.
>>Hi.
My name's Fadumo Adan.
I am originally from Somalia.
>>My name is Yael Berhane, and
I'm originally from Eritrea.
>>Hi.
My name is Melissa Ivey, and
I'm from Denver, Colorado.
>>My name is Lisa Saldana.
>>And I'm really excited
to actually have a place
where I can deal with
some of the problems
that I faced as a refugee
and the things that
traumatized me growing up.
And I think being
in this class will
allow me to share
that with my community
and help other women who
have been through it.
It's hard for us to let
go of a lot of things
that we go through
as refugees just
because we're on that
mode of survival.
And it's unfortunate
that a lot of us
don't really realize
the importance of having
a healthy mind and
body and brain.
And learning these
techniques really allowed
me to relax and just
focus on other things,
including my future.
So I'm very grateful for it.
>>I am very excited about this
refugee ambassador program
because I am certain that
it'll help me develop
my skills as a facilitator,
as a community leader,
as an organizer.
And I'm also interested in
bringing this kind of work
and this kind of intentionality
into my career as an advocate
for refugees and
immigrants worldwide.
>>I'm looking most forward
to the neurosculpting, just
an opportunity to get to
understand trauma victims
and just be sensitive to
where they're coming from
and to just have a
way to relate to them
and to help them feel
without being intrusive,
and just being understanding.
So I'm looking forward to that.
>>I'm very excited about
learning about the brain.
That especially
excites me, and how it
relates to neurosculpting.
I would like to
use it, especially
with women who have had a
loss during their pregnancy.
And I work mostly
with Spanish speaking,
and so I'm also looking
forward to learning
how to use this
information in Spanish.
>>I'm really excited about
this refugee neurosculpting
ambassador program
that we're doing.
I think it's really going to
give the women not only tools
for their communities, but
especially within themselves.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: You have such an
amazingly inspirational story.
I mean, it's so incredible
what you've been through,
and what you've taught
yourself, and how
you're teaching other people.
Tell us what's the
next step for you?
You're doing so much.
How long have you been
doing neurosculpting?
>>WIMBERGER:
Neurosculpting since 2007,
before it had a word.
I sort of coined
the term in 2011,
and the Institute
opened in 2012.
But I have been
doing it since 2007.
>>LISA: It's as if this
is your mission in life.
>>WIMBERGER: This is
completely my mission.
I don't question it anymore.
It just has a life of its own.
So there are many next steps.
My job is to always be
a bridge and a teacher.
So my next steps involve how
can I enrich the curriculum?
How can I offer more to my
clients and my students?
How can I get this
out to the world
in ways that make sense,
that invite people in?
And with that mission,
we are crafting
neurosculpting
yoga, which will be
a combination of the mental
entrainment during the yoga
asanas.
So we're working together with
a licensed psychotherapist
and yoga practitioner
to craft that modality.
And we will be bringing that
out to the world very soon.
>>LISA: So it'll
be words with yoga.
>>WIMBERGER: It will be the
exact merging of those two.
So you're guided
through the meditations
during the yoga
poses, and you are
releasing in the
methodical process
with the bi-hemispheric
activation.
And so we're bringing that
to the world via yoga.
The work with the
refugees will continue.
And then my mission,
of course, is
to go deeper not only
with police officers,
but veterans need this.
So the military needs
so much help and support
for what they're asked
to do, what they do do,
and what they are not
prepared to deal with.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WIMBERGER: So the
mission is to bring
this in that direction.
And we're also starting the
talks with a corrections
facility to get a
prison project in place.
>>LISA: What about
women's shelters?
>>WIMBERGER: Absolutely.
We have a number of
trainers who are survivors
of deep physical trauma
or domestic violence.
And together with
the trainers, we're
looking at where do
we need to take this,
and how can we get
it out to the world.
>>LISA: So the
trainer will bring it
into their individual
environment as they need to.
That's very inspiring story.
Thank you so much.
And I'm really
happy to meet you.
>>WIMBERGER: I am as well.
Thank you so much for this time.
>>LISA: Well, I'm sure if I
talk to you in another year
or so, you will have 10
more things under your belt,
because you're moving
quite fast with this.
>>WIMBERGER: Yes.
>>LISA: But I can
see you're driven.
You're committed.
You have a mission.
And you're also a mom.
>>WIMBERGER: And I'm also a mom.
Yeah, my whole mission
after I had my daughter
was to teach her that all
dreams are attainable.
>>LISA: Wow.
That's a wonderful mission.
And that's what you do.
And you have taught
people, as well,
as they watched this video.
So thank you again, Lisa.
And if you would like to watch
this incredibly inspirational
story again, and you can
watch the replay of it,
you can go to gaiamtv.com and
even share it with your friends
from there.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]